## Introduction

`Value Types` are a great way to introduce richness into our model, enforce invariants and maintain data integrity. They are a useful and powerful tool that every developer should know and use when working with any kind of domain.

`Value Types` are based in the concepts proposed by the `Value Object` pattern. The main difference between them is the way we implement them. A `Value Object` will always be, well, an object. While the `Value Types` can be aliases over primitives.

Even though they are really useful and powerful, they have some downsides that make it hard for the pattern to hold on to their promises of a rich and integral model.

## Defining Our PhoneNumber Domain Concept

Let's start by discussing the domain of our application. We are working in a domain in which exists an entity called `PhoneNumber`.

In order for a domain concept to exist in our code first we must define a type for it.

```ts
type PhoneNumber = string
```

`PhoneNumber` is a `Value Type`, that means that it is a `type alias`, for another type, in this `PhoneNumber` is an alias for a `string`. In other words, every `PhoneNumber` is a `string`.

This means that we can use both `PhoneNumber` or `string` as a type in order to represent the same value.

```ts
const phone1: PhoneNumber = '5551234567'
const phone2: string = '5551234567'

const phone3: PhoneNumber = phone2;
const phone4: string = phone1;
```

Due to the fact that `PhoneNumber` is a (`type alias` for) `string` we can treat them interchangeably. But just we can, doesn't mean that we should.

## Defining Constraints for PhoneNumber

Even though every `PhoneNumber` is a _VALID_ `string` that doesn't mean that every `string` is a _VALID_ `PhoneNumber`.

While modeling any domain we must always search for the rules that we must follow in order to consider any piece of data as `valid`. We call these rules `invariants` or `constraints`, and we call the process of validating these rules `enforcing invariants` or `enforcing constraints`.

In our domain we know that a _VALID_ `PhoneNumber` must be a `string`, `non-empty`, and have a length of `10` characters. These three rules are our `constraints`, or the `invariants` we must `enforce` in order to consider a `string` a valid `PhoneNumber`.

## Type Definition vs Type Creation

In TypeScript the process of defining a `user generated type` (`type aliases`) is completely separated from the process of creating a value of such type. So we must come up with our own mechanism to create `PhoneNumbers`.

This mechanism could be anything: a class, a method, or a function. We are going to use `functions` since we favor a `functional` approach over an `object-oriented` approach.

This function is going to be called `phoneNumber`[^1]. This function won't enforce any `invariant` yet, it will only take a `string` and return a `PhoneNumber`.

```ts
const phoneNumber = (value: string): PhoneNumber => {
	return value
}
```

With that we can stop using the `: type` notation in TypeScript and let the compiler infer the types.

```ts
const phone = phoneNumber('1234567') // PhoneNumber
```

Another added benefit of having a dedicated `creating mechanism` is the centralization of the `domain rules` inside the `phoneNumber` function. This will prevent code duplication, avoid [[Domain Fragmentation]], and will help us enforce the [[1 Single Responsibility Principle]].

## Enforcing Constraints for PhoneNumber

As we discussed earlier, even though every `PhoneNumber` is a _VALID_ `string` not every _VALID_ `string` is a _VALID_ `PhoneNumber`. In order to make sure every `string` returned by the function `phoneNumber` is a valid `PhoneNumber` we must `enforce the invariants` inside the function body.

```ts
const phoneNumber = (value: string): PhoneNumber => {
	if (typeof value !== 'string') {
		throw new Error('PhoneNumber: value must be a string')
	}

	if (!value || !value.length) {
		throw new Error('PhoneNumber: value cannot be empty')
	}

	if (value.length !== 10) {
		throw new Error("PhoneNumber: value must be a 10 character string")
	}

	return value
}
```

The first constraint checks if the `value` is a `string`[^2], the second one checks if it's an `empty string`, and the third one checks if it has a length of `10` characters. If all the `constraints` are `valid` then the value is returned at the end of the function body.

All we have to do left is use our `phoneNumber` function:[^3]

```ts
const phone1 = phoneNumber(1) // throws an error at compile and runtime
const phone2 = phoneNumber('') // throws an error at runtime
const phone3 = phoneNumber('123') // throws an error at runtime
const phone4 = phoneNumber('5551234567') // this works fine
```

By always passing our `string`s to the `phoneNumber` function we ensure that the constraints of a `PhoneNumber` are enforced. In other words, they will always represent valid `PhoneNumber`s.

This adds a layer of safety to our code: if the data that we are working with is always in a valid state, then we don't have to perform safety checks later down the road, and instead we can focus on what we want to do instead. Or at least, in theory.

## Type Aliases in TypeScript are not sound

Even though value types help us enforce domain integrity at code level typescript's type system doesn't help us that much at enforcing type soundness. In other words, even though a `PhoneNumber` will always have a valid state, there's no guarantee that everything that we pass to the `account` function as a `phoneNumber` will be a valid `PhoneNumber`.

Since `PhoneNumber` is a `type alias` for `string` the TypeScript compiler interprets every `string` as a valid `PhoneNumber`. But, as we have discussed below, within the domain of our application not every `string` is a valid `PhoneNumber`.

This is one of the downsides of structural typing. Yes, a `PhoneNumber` is a `string`, but it shouldn't be any `string`. The `PhoneNumber` type should be `string`-based, not any `string`. Unfortunately, TypeScript dones't have a mechanism to allows to make that distinction.

This leads to the issue of being able to by-pass the domain constraints by creating `"phoneNumbers"` using different methods, besides the `phoneNumber` function.[[Definition Of Data]]

Let's imagine we have a function called `formatPhoneNumber` which will take a `PhoneNumber` and returns a `FormattedPhoneNumber`:

```ts
type FormattedPhoneNumber = string;

const formattedPhoneNumber = (value: PhoneNumber): FormattedPhoneNumber => {
	const area = value.slice(0, 3)
	const first = value.slice(3, 6)
	const second = value.slice(6)

	return `(${area}) ${first} ${second}`
}
```

One of the constraints of `FormattedPhoneNumber` is that In order for it to be valid, first it must be a valid `PhoneNumber`.

Instead of `enforcing` the same validations as `PhoneNumber` we just take for granted that the user of the function will pas a valid `PhoneNumber`.

```ts
const adhocPhone = '5551234567890'
const john = formattedPhoneNumber(adhocPhone)

const emptyPhone = ''
const jenny = formattedPhoneNumber(emptyPhone);

const nullPhone = null
const george = formattedPhoneNumber(nullPhone);

// the only valid phone
const validPhone = phoneNumber('5551234567')
// the only valid entity
const jean = formattedPhoneNumber(validPhone);
```

Since any `string` is a `PhoneNumber` (not a valid one, we must note) the TypeScript compiler won't throw any warning nor error. But at runtime we will see data corruption and wrong results. This is not a design flaw or a bug, this is a innate characteristic of TypeScript's `structural typing`[^4].

None of the first three `FormattedPhoneNumbers` would be valid because none of the `PhoneNumbers` we are providing are valid[^5]. And none of first three `PhoneNumbers` are valid because we are allowed to by-pass our domain `constraints`.

We can imagine how this would impact the data integrity of an application with a dozens or even hundreds of entities and value types.

## Holding an empty bag

One of the promises of TypeScript was to prevent us from shooting ourselves in the foot by introducing the notion of types. That was the whole idea behind TypeScript.

But unfortunately that promise was not fulfilled with type aliases. Type aliases leave type soundness to the developers. This is problematic because we, developers, are humans; and as humans, we make mistakes.

And by leaving us the responsibility of enforcing type soundness bugs can (and will) be introduced. The compiler let us by-pass all our domain rules, because by separating the type definition and the type creation the compiler is not aware of the creation mechanism. And by not being aware of the creation mechanism, cannot force us to always use when dealing with `user generated types`.

## Final Thoughts

Even though `Value Types` are a great pattern, they are not enough to ensure domain integrity because of the lack of type soundness in the TypeScript type system.

## Footnotes
[^1]: In order to differentiate the `type` alias from the lifting `function` we are going to use the following convention: `type` names are going to be written using `PascalCase`, and functions are going to be written using `camelCase`.

[^2]: The first validation is there just in case we are able to bypass typescript at compilation time or we depend from "unsafe" sources at runtime. That style of programming is called [[Defensive Programming]]

[^3]: There's one important detail we must mention about the `phoneNumber` function. Functions that create objects are called [[Factory Function]]s. But our `phoneNumber` function is not returning an object, but a `string`, nor it is creating instances of a type. The `phoneNumber` is essentially a glorified validator function.

[^4]: The reasons behind this design choice is outside of the scope of this discussion, but you can check (insert source) for an explanation

[^5]: See [[Garbage In Garbage Out]]