## Enforcing Data Integrity on Entities

Value Types are building blocks for other types, like `entities`. They don't usually appear in the wild by themselves, but always as components (or pieces) of larger types.

```ts
type Account = {
	id: number;
	username: string;
	phoneNumber: PhoneNumber;
}
```

The type `Account` is build using three different pieces of data: an `id`, a `username`[^3], and a `phoneNumber`.

In order for `Account` to be valid, all its properties should be valid too. This is where enforcing constraints in value types shine.

If we didn't have a `lifting` function for `PhoneNumber` type we would have to pollute the `Account` entity `factory function` by having to replicate every single constraint validation we have inside the `phoneNumber` into the `account` function.

```ts
const account = (id: number, username: string, phoneNumber: string): Account => {
	if (typeof phoneNumber !== 'string') {
		throw new Error('Account: phoneNumber must be a string')
	}

	if (!phoneNumber || !phoneNumber.length) {
		throw new Error('Account: phoneNumber cannot be empty')
	}

	if (phoneNumber.length !== 10) {
		throw new Error("Account: phoneNumber must be a 10 character string")
	}

  return { id, username, phoneNumber }
}
```

In the previous example we are only enforcing the constraints for `phoneNumber`, but we can easily see how big this function would grow if we had to also enforce the constrains of `id` and `username`. This generates a set problems.

First, it introduces the problem of scalability: if we later have to add new properties to the `Account` type the `account` function would have to add the constraint validations for the new properties, making the function grow even more.

Second, the `account` function has too many responsibilities: if the constrains of `id` changes then we would need to change the `account` function, if later the constraints of `username` changes we would need to also change the `account` function. For each property we would end up with a new responsibility for the `account` function besides object creation.

Third, we introduce code duplication: every entity that has a property `PhoneNumber` would also have to `copy + paste` all the constrains validations.

Fourth, we introduce domain fragmentation: if one of the constrains of `PhoneNumber` changes over time we would have to scout through all the `lifiting` functions for entities that rely on `PhoneNumber`. This could (and will) cause some `lifting` functions to have wrong or obsolete constraints for `PhoneNumber`.

## Entity Integrity

This is why having `lifting` functions for `value types` is so important. They remove all these issues by centralizing constraint validations in one single place.

Let's remove all the constraint validations from the `account` function, and let's delegate back that responsibility to the `phoneNumber` `lifting function`.

```ts
const account = (id: number, username: string, phoneNumber: string): Account => {
	const validPhoneNumber = PhoneNumber(phoneNumber)
	return { id, username, phoneNumber }
}
```

In the previous example we see what could be the most obvious an the easiest refactor: making `Account` create an instance of `PhoneNumber` in order to delegate constraint validations. If the provided `string` is a valid `PhoneNumber` it would return the value, otherwise this would throw an error.

Even though this refactor is better and removes some of the problems we listed before it still has a few.

First, the `account` function still has more than one responsibility. Not only it has to return an object of type `Account`, but to also create an instance of `PhoneNumber`.

Second, it still has more than one reason to change. If the parameters of the `phoneNumber` function changes, the we would have to change the `Account` function as-well.

```ts
const phoneNumber = (value: string, len: number): PhoneNumber => {
	// code omitted
	// do something with the new parameter

	return value
}

const account = (id: number, username: string, phoneNumber: string): Account => {
	const validPhoneNumber = PhoneNumber(phoneNumber, 10)
	return { id, username, phoneNumber }
}
```

In the example above we can see how by changing the parameter list on the `phoneNumber` function we have to also update the `account` function. Again, this is because the `account` function has mixed responsibilities. It should not be up to the `account` function to call the `phoneNumber` function.

Instead we can delegate that responsibility to the caller of the function `account`. Instead of asking for a `string`, we can ask for a `PhoneNumber`.

```ts
const account = (id: number, username: string, phoneNumber: PhoneNumber): Account => {
	return { id, username, phoneNumber }
}
```

By marking `phoneNumber` of type `PhoneNumber` we move that responsibility outside of the `account` function to the caller.

```ts
const john = account(1, 'john.doe', PhoneNumber('5551234567'))
john // { id: 1, username: 'john.doe', phoneNumber: '5551234567' }
```

With this, we have reduced the number of responsibilities of the `account` function to one: creating an object of type `Account`.

Not only that, every value type that `account` takes is in a valid state, making the state of the object created by the `account` function a valid `Account` object.